All we did were linked lists arrays,
searching, sorting,
all the things we're gonna
be shifting gears and
going into what is considered more
of the advanced ish data structure.
So this would represent probably
the last 4 to 5 weeks of your
second semester in college and
it will bleed into a little bit of
the fourth class usually in college.
Fourth class being
advanced data structures.
And so I hope that everyone practiced
a little bit of recursion if you're weak
at recursion,
if you're great at recursion,
this will be easy breezy
beautiful data structures.
All right,
eventually all things lead to trees.
Well, that's technically a lie.
All roads lead to Rome.
But all data structures eventually become
graphs and all data structures really
are graphs if you think about it, but
I always end up using trees on projects.
They just somehow are everywhere.
I don't know what it is, but
it just happens all the time,
and so
we're gonna kind of start going over them.
Anyway, so where are trees?
Your file system is a tree.
So let's just jump over here and
just do a simple LS of my route.
So, if you're on Windows that'd be C:/ or
\ or a slash that's the opposite of Unix.
Effectively, if you think about that there
is a single point on my drive in which has
many directories.
Each one of those directories can have
many subdirectories, they can actually
point to other directories which
kind of breaks the tree concept,
but we'll just keep going
with the tree concept here.
They just start from a top,
a single point and go on down.
That's effectively a tree,
your hard drive and
how it's organized is effectively a tree.
The DOM, your DOM is also a tree.
Think about it, body or
HTML body, thousands of div tags.
I don't know how many div
tags are in a website, but
I know what's going up faster
than the stock market.
And so that's a tree as well.
It's a general tree, it has many
children and have zero to many children.
And there's many,
many more compilers abstract syntax tree
if you've been to a s t explorer.net.
I think it is, you get to play with the
tree that is what Babel transforms from
one type of JavaScript to
another type of JavaScript.
So it is something that's pretty useful to
just have a fundamental understanding of.
And so hopefully today, you will be
able to just kind of hurdle that,
be able to be understanding
exactly what trees are.
All right, so we're gonna do a quick
whiteboard example and just solidify this.
Just in case none of those
examples stuck with you,
let's just kind of walk
over exactly what they are.
All right, so a tree usually when we
draw are represented by nodes, and
you can think of a node a lot
like the linked list node, right?
Up, there's an O in there.
And it's generic probably over some
sort of t in which there's different
ways we can represent a node in a tree.
But let's go with this,
there will be something like a value, and
then there's gonna be
something like children.
So instead of having a next or previous,
you can have an array of
possible connections.
Now, that means there can be zero or
more connections.
So if I were to draw this out,
it would look something like this, right?
There is many, many, many connections, and
you can just imagine your file
system here as it goes, right?
This makes a lot of sense if you've
seen anything that looks like this,
you can think of this as HTML, right?
This as your body, and then of course all
those lovely div tags over and over again.
That's why when you use a node in that,
if you ever actually use vanilla
JavaScript you'll actually have access to
a node which does actually have
access to a children's array.
And you can kind of walk around and
do that, and
each one of those children have
possible children, so forth and so on.
You get the idea, right?
Pretty fun.
There's other ways you can represent
nodes, and we will do other ways but
right now, we'll just kind of
focus on the general case.
All right, so
let's talk about some terminology.
Root, when I say the word root, what I'm
saying is your top most node, right?
So the one that's at the very tippy top of
the tree in the file system that is slash
or C colon other slash.
In most trees that is just usually
some node that has either no value,
which we'll see in some cases, or
a middle value near the median,
the smallest value, the largest value.
Usually the root node has some level of
importance in a lot of the data structures
we'll be using.
All right, second height.
Height is simply described as the longest
path from the root to the most childish
node, right?
The most the greatest grand
descendant of the tree.
So, whatever that is,
that is the height of the tree.
Now, that means that trees don't have to
be balanced, they don't have to be in
some sort of perfect ordering, they may
have one really, really long strand and
that would be the height of your tree.
So, even if 99% of your tree
exists within three levels and
only one branch goes down 100,
the heights are 100.
Let's see, binary tree,
binary trees are pretty simple.
Binary trees are what we're gonna be
mainly focusing on today cuz they tend to
be the data structure that is
most frequent in a lot of items.
It's either general or binary.
There are some other cool ones, maps and
C++ are a form of tree
if I'm not mistaken.
A binary tree is exactly
what you think it is.
It's just a tree with at max two children.
And we did a lot of algorithms that
involved splitting things in half from
yesterday, so you can imagine that today,
we'll be splitting things in half again.
Often when you're using a binary tree,
you'll see something like left and
right, instead of a children array.
Just cuz it's a lot simpler.
It's already assumed that there's going to
be a left, there's going to be a right,
it's a binary tree.
So it makes it a lot easier not
to have an array of 0 to 2.
And all these same properties
apply to a binary tree.
Root, height, all that general tree,
the exact same thing except for
it's one too many we've already
kind of shown a general tree.
A binary search tree is simply a tree
with a specific ordering to it.
And usually, it's a strong ordering it
actually is in some sort of very strong
order, it's not like a weak ordering
if you remember from yesterday.
A weak ordering had some
level of ordering to it,
a binary tree tends to have
a very strong ordering.
Leaves, that's simply a node
without any more children.
So this is binary tree,
if there's a bunch of children here,
this wouldn't be a node until eventually
or a leaf until eventually we get to
a part where there's children
with an empty array, right?
So this one leaf, if we had just
a single note here, it's a leaf.
So there's many leaves to a tree.
I've never liked when they
try to take a terminology and
then use like kitschy terms from reality.
So a tree with leaves, I don't really
like any of that kind of things.
Terminus would have been a much better but
they chose leaf, fantastic.
A balanced tree is a tree in
which all the child nodes,
all the leaves eventually
are on the same level.
That'd be a perfectly balanced tree,
the more it's out of balance,
the more problematic some of
the algorithms will become.
And so, that is something to kind of think
about is that it's not always easy to keep
a tree balanced.
You don't know when you're
gonna get the data, but
it's a whole branch of trees
is just keeping them balanced.
A whole branch of trees,
I just realized what a great pun that was.
Branching factor,
how many children there are?
So, a binary tree has
a branching factor of two,
a general tree could have a branching
factor of infinity, right?
You don't know how big that is.
There's other types of trees, we're not
gonna be touching on pretty much any type
of tree other than general and binary.
Hopefully this makes sense and seeing
Quicksort from yesterday how we drew it
out, it's a lot like a binary tree, right?
We had Quicksort.
We would split the input in half and
have another Quicksort and
split the input in half.
It's effectively a binary
tree in some sort of sense.